**HARI SELDON** -- Born in the 11,988th year of the Galatica Era: died 12069. The dates are more commonly given in terms of the current Foundation Era as -79 FE to the year 1 F.E. Born to middle-class parents on Helicon, Arcturus sector (where his father, in a legend of doubtful authenticity, was a tobacco grower in the hydroponic plants of the planet), he early showed amazing ability in mathematics. Anecdotes concerning his ability are innumerable, and some are contradictory. At the age of two, he is said to have ... Undoubtedly his greatest contributions were in the field of psycohistory. Seldon found the field little more than a set of vague axioms; he left it a profound statistical science...

The best existing authority we have for the details of his life is the biography written by Gaal Dormick who, as a young man, met Seldon two years before the great mathematician's death. The story of the meeting...It is customary to think of Hari Seldon only in connection with psychohistory, to see him only as mathematics and social change personified. There is no doubt that he himself encouraged this for at no time, in his formal writings, did he give any hint as to how he came to solve the various problems of pyschohistory. His leaps of thought might have all been plucked from air for all he tells us. Nor does he tell us of the blind alleys into which he crept, or the wrong turnings he may have made. - As for his private life, it is a blank. Concerning his parents and sibling, we know a handful of facts, no more. His only son, Raych Seldon, is known to have been adopted, but how that came about is not known. Concerning his wife, we know only that she existed. Clearly, Seldon wanted to be a cipher except where psychohistory was concerned. It is as though he felt, or wanted it to be felt, that he did not live, he merely psychohistorified....though it is the best existing authority on the details of Seldon's life, the biograpy by Gaal Dornick cannot be trusted regarding the early rise to power. 

As a young man, Dornick met Seldon only two years before the great mathist's death. By then, rumor and even legend had already begun to grow about Seldon, particularly regarding his shadowy period of large-scale authority within the fading Imperium. How Seldon became the only mathist in all of Galactic history to ascend to political power remains one of the most intractable puzzles for Seldon scholars. He gave no sign of ambitions beyond the building of a science of "history"-all the while envisioning not the mere fathoming of teh past, but in fact the prediction of the future. (As Seldon himself remarked to Dornick, he early on desired "the prevention of certain kinds of futures.") Certainly the mysertious exit of Eto Demerzel as First Minister was the opening act of a play of large proportions. That Cleon I immediately turned to Seldon suggests that Demerzel hand-picked his successor. 

Yet why go to Seldon? Historians are divided about the motivations of the central players in this crucial moment. The Empire had entered a period of challenge and disruption, coming especially from what Seldon termed the "chaos worlds." How Seldon adroitly maneuvered aginst powerful opponenets, despite no recorded experience in the political arena, remains an active but vexing area of research…Little is known about the final days of Hari Seldon, though many romanticized accounts exist, some of them purportedly by his own hand. None has any proved validity. What appears evident, however, is that Seldon spent his last months uneventfully, no doubt enjoying satisfaction in his life’s work. For with his gift of mathematical insight, and the powers or psychohistory at his command, he must surely have seen the panorama of history stretching before him, confirming the great path of destiny that he had already mapped out. Although death would soon claim him, no other mortal ever knew with such confidence and certainty the bright promise that the future would hold in store… found dead, slumped over his desk in his office at Streeling University in 12,069 G.E. (1 F.E.). Apparently Seldon had been working up to his last moments on psychohistorical equations; his activated Prime Radiant was discovered clutched in his hand...According to Seldon's instructions, the instrument was shipped to his colleague Gaal Dornick who had recently emigrated to Terminus...Seldon's body was jettisoned into space, also in accordance with instructions he'd left. The official memorial service on Trantor was simple, though well attended. It is worth noting that Seldon's old friend former First Minister Eto Demerzel attended the event. Demerxel had not been seen since his mysterious disappearance immediately following the Joranumite Conspiracy during the reign of Emperor Cleon I. Attempts by the Commission of Public Safety to locate Demerzel in the days of following the memorial proved to be unsuccessful...Wanda Seldon, Hari Seldon's grandaughter, did not attend the ceremony. It was rumored that she was grief-stricken and had refused all public appearances. To this day, her whereabouts from then on remain unknown...It has been said that Hari Seldon left this life as he lived it, for he died with the future he created unfolding all around him...The centuries recede, and the legend of Hari Seldon grows: The brillaint man, wise man, sad man who charted the course of the human future in the old Empire. But revisionist views prosper, and cannot always be easily dismissed. To understand Seldon, we are sometimes tempted to refer to apocrypha, myths, even fairy tales from those distant times. We are frustrated by the contradictions of incomplete documents and what amount to hagiographies. This we know without reference to the revionist: that Seldon was brilliant, Seldon was key. But Seldon was neither saint nor divinely inspired prophet, and of course, he did not act alone. The most pervasive myths involve... 

(Foundation, Prelude to Foundation, Foundation's Fear, Foundation’s Triumph, Forward the Foundation, Foundation and Chaos)...
